Let us look at the problem of searching for
a value in an array.
So, in general the search problem is to find
whether a value K is present, present in a
collection of values A and in our case we
will think of A as generally as a sequence
of values.
And moreover, we also assume that the sequence
is something like integers, where we can talk
of one value being less than another value.
So, the values can be ordered with respect
to each other.
So, we already saw that we can keep such sequences
in two different ways, as arrays and as lists.
And depending on whether we keep it as arrays
or list, the way we can access the elements
is different.
So, the first question we might ask is, whether
searching makes a difference in a list verses
an array and the second question we might
ask is, is there some importance to how the
values are arranged in the sequence, does
it help if they are in ascending or descending
order or does it not matter.
Is it equally the same to search for something
in a randomly ordered collection of values
or when it is structured in some particular
way?
So, in the unsorted case we have no choice
basically, we have a sequence A which runs
from 0 to n minus 1.
So, we must look at all the values, because
we have no idea where K maybe.
So, systematic way to do it is to start with
the position 0 and just scan all the way to
n minus 1.
So, we have this loop here, which scans and
this scan either terminates when you reach
the end without finding it or when at some
position i we find that A i is equal to K.
And then depending on that we either say that
it is found, in which case we return the position
or we have reached i equal to n, which means
we are gone beyond A n minus 1 and so, we
return not 1, minus 1 which is an invalid
position indicate that it is not found.
So, we saw before that the worst case actually
happens when K is not an element of A, K does
not come in A, we have to scan A 0 to A n
minus 1 in order to determine that K is not
there.
Because, we have no evidence in advance which
position it is likely to be.
So, this means that in the worst case searching
for an element in an unsorted array takes
linear time.
And of course, it does not matter now whether
it is an array or a list, because in a list
we could also in linear time start from the
first element and follow the links all the
way to the end, in an array we start with
A 0 and go all the way to A n minus 1, both
of them take linear time.
On the other hand if the sequence is sorted
and in particular if it is an array, we can
be a little more intelligent.
So, what we know is that the values are say
in ascending order.
So, if you probe the value in the middle and
check is this equal to K, if the value that
we have is equal to K of course, we have found
it.
If it is smaller than the value here, then
we only need to search in this half, and if
it is larger then we need to search in this
half.
Now, this is something that we intuitively
do all the time, this is how we look for say
words in a dictionary or when we play 20 questions,
we try to ask questions about the age of a
person, then you say is this person less than
40, is this person greater than 65 and so
on.
So, this is something we know intuitively,
but we can formalize.
So, we take the midpoint of the range we are
searching for.
If the midpoint is the value that we want
we found it; otherwise, we depending on the
value we are looking for and what the value
is at the midpoint, we search either the bottom
half or the top half.
So, this has a name which many of you may
already know, this is called binary search.
So, here is a simple recursive algorithm for
binary search.
So, in general it searches an array, remember
that when we do the search we might be searching
different segments depending on how far we
have progressed in the search.
So, in general binary search takes a value
K to search an array and two end points, left
and right and just to make sure that we get
a everything right, we will have the convention
that it searches from the index l to the index
r minus 1, that is it searches from l to r,
but not including r itself.
So, now if l and r are actually the same,
then we have an empty array, because l to
r minus 1 is actually something where there
are no elements in between.
So, we say we have not found it.
So, when the interval that we are searching
for becomes empty, the array definitely does
not contain the value we are looking for.
Otherwise, we compute the midpoint between
l and r by taking the sum and dividing by
2 and because this might be an odd number,
we use integer division.
Now, we examine at this point we have found
the midpoint.
So, now, we examine if the value that we want
is there at the midpoint.
If so, we return true.
Otherwise, if the value that we want is smaller
than the midpoint, then we go to the left
and if the value that we want is bigger than
the midpoint, then we go to the right.
So, this either goes from left to mid minus
1 or mid plus 1 to right.
In other words we exclude mid from our search.
So, this, the first case runs the search from
left to mid minus 1 because that is our assumption,
if we call it with mid, it goes to mid minus
1.
This one starts at mid plus 1 and goes to
right minus 1.
So, the original thing was from left to right
minus 1 and we have now excluded mid from
this and we have also halved the interval
to search.
So, the crucial advantage of binary search
is that each step we halve the interval to
search and at some point we will reach 1 and
then when we halve 1, we will get an interval
of size 0 and so, we will get an immediate
answer.
So, we can write as we saw for such recursive
functions, we can write what is called a recurrence.
Recurrence is just an expression for the time,
in terms of smaller values of same expression.
So, the base case is that when we have T of
n we mean the time taken to search in a list
or an array actually of size n.
So, T of 0 is 1.
So, if we have an empty array we have nothing
to do and T of n in general is 1 step to find
and compare.
So, this one is actually a constant number
of steps to compare with the midpoint and
decide to go up, down and all that.
So, those operations plus the time taken to
search whichever half we focus on, the left
half and right half.
Remember, that if we look at the left half,
we never going to look at the right half again.
So, one way to solve such a recurrence is
to unwind it.
So, we have T n is 1 plus T n by 2.
So, we take n by 2 and we do n by 2 divided
by 2 and rather than write it is as n by 4
we write is as n by 2 square.
And this is because now, if I do one more
time it will be 1 plus 1 plus 1 divided by
2 cubed and so on.
So, in general you can see that if I do it
k times then I am going to have k 1's here,
if I do 3 times I have 1 plus 1 plus 1 plus
T n by 2 to the 3, 4 or 4 plus T n by 2 to
the 4 and so on.
So, after k steps I have k plus T of n by
2 to the k, now when n by 2 to the k becomes
1 at the next step I am going to get T of
0.
So, when does this become 1, when n is 2 to
the k in other words when k is log 2 of n.
So, when I get log 2 of n, then this will
become T of 1 and at the next step this is
going to become 1 plus T of 0.
So, this is going to be log n 1s and so, over
all the complexity of binary search is just
order of log n.
So, we have gone from a linear search in the
case of an unsorted array to a logarithmic
search in the case of a sorted array.
So, we mentioned in the previous unit about
arrays and list that, things that work on
list may not work on arrays and vice versa.
So, here is an example of something which
works only for arrays.
The idea of looking up the midpoint and then
going left works only, if you can find the
midpoint in constant time, if you have to
spend time looking for the constantÉ for
the midpoint, then you cannot get this recurrence
anymore.
it is not going to be 1 plus T of n by 2,
but it is going to be n by 2 plus T of n by
2 and then we will actually get a linear time.
So, binary search for a list will actually
turn out be linear, because of the time it
takes us to go to the midpoint.
So, this works only for arrays, but really
the remarkable thing about binary search is
that by only looking at a very small fraction
of the sequence, we can conclude that an element
is not present.
So, we know for instance that 2 to the n,
2 to the 10 is 1024.
So, if I give you 1000 values, we can look
at 10 or maybe 11 and say that something is
not there.
So, the overwhelming number or values we do
not even have to look at in order to decide
whether a value is there or not and this makes
binary search to be remarkable procedure,
if you think about it carefully.